.\" Rufus man page
.\" Copyright © 2025 Rufus contributors
.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-3.0-or-later
.TH RUFUS 1 "2025" "Rufus 4.13" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rufus \- The Reliable USB Formatting Utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rufus
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
.PP
.B rufus
\fB\-\-device\fR \fIDEVICE\fR
[\fB\-\-image\fR \fIIMAGE\fR]
[\fB\-\-fs\fR \fIFILESYSTEM\fR]
[\fB\-\-partition\-scheme\fR \fISCHEME\fR]
[\fB\-\-target\fR \fITARGET\fR]
[\fB\-\-boot\-type\fR \fITYPE\fR]
[\fB\-\-cluster\-size\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-persistence\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-bad\-blocks\fR]
[\fB\-\-nb\-passes\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fB\-\-unattend\-xml\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB\-\-include\-hdds\fR]
[\fB\-\-zero\-drive\fR]
[\fB\-\-force\-large\-fat32\fR]
[\fB\-\-ntfs\-compression\fR]
[\fB\-\-win\-to\-go\fR]
[\fB\-\-write\-as\-image\fR]
[\fB\-\-fast\-zeroing\fR]
[\fB\-\-list\-devices\fR]
[\fB\-\-json\fR]
[\fB\-\-label\fR \fILABEL\fR]
[\fB\-\-quick\fR|\fB\-\-no\-quick\fR]
[\fB\-\-verify\fR]
[\fB\-\-no\-prompt\fR]
[\fB\-\-version\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rufus
creates bootable USB drives and formats removable media.  It supports a
wide range of bootable image formats (ISO, IMG, VHD/VHDX), filesystem
types, and partition schemes.
.PP
When invoked without arguments (or when compiled with GTK support and a
display is available) Rufus presents a graphical user interface.  When
\fB\-\-device\fR is supplied on the command line the non\-interactive
\fIcli\fR mode is activated; this mode is useful for scripting and
headless servers.
.PP
.B WARNING:
Formatting a device permanently destroys all data on it.  Make sure you
specify the correct device path.  Rufus requires root privileges to open
block devices for writing; it will attempt to re-launch itself via
.BR pkexec (1)
if it is not already running as root.
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Mandatory (CLI mode)
.TP
.BR \-d ", " \-\-device " " \fIDEVICE\fR
Target block device path, e.g.\& \fB/dev/sdb\fR.
This option is required when operating in CLI mode.
.SS Optional (CLI mode)
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-image " " \fIIMAGE\fR
Path to an image file (\fI.iso\fR, \fI.img\fR, \fI.vhd\fR, \fI.vhdx\fR,
\fI.gz\fR, \fI.xz\fR, \fI.bz2\fR, \fI.zstd\fR) to write to the device.
If omitted the device is formatted without copying an image.
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-fs " " \fIFILESYSTEM\fR
Filesystem to create on the device.  Supported values:
.RS
.IP \fBfat16\fR
FAT16 (for small volumes ≤ 2 GiB).
.IP \fBfat32\fR
FAT32 (default for most bootable drives).
.IP \fBntfs\fR
NTFS (requires
.BR mkntfs (8)
from ntfs-3g).
.IP \fBudf\fR
UDF (requires
.BR mkudffs (8)).
.IP \fBexfat\fR
exFAT (requires
.BR mkfs.exfat (8)
or
.BR mkexfatfs (8)).
.IP \fBext2\fR
ext2 filesystem.
.IP \fBext3\fR
ext3 journaling filesystem.
.IP \fBext4\fR
ext4 journaling filesystem.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-partition\-scheme " " \fISCHEME\fR
Partition table type.  Supported values:
.RS
.IP \fBmbr\fR
Master Boot Record (default; compatible with legacy BIOS and older systems).
.IP \fBgpt\fR
GUID Partition Table (required for drives > 2 TiB and for UEFI Class 3).
.RE
.TP
.BR \-t ", " \-\-target " " \fITARGET\fR
Boot target system.  Supported values:
.RS
.IP \fBbios\fR
Target legacy BIOS / CSM boot.
.IP \fBuefi\fR
Target UEFI boot.
.RE
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-boot\-type " " \fITYPE\fR
Boot type to install on the device.  Supported values:
.RS
.IP \fBnon-bootable\fR
Do not install any boot code; format the device as a data drive only.
.IP \fBimage\fR
Write the image supplied via \fB\-\-image\fR (or detect automatically when
\fB\-\-image\fR is given without \fB\-\-boot\-type\fR).
.IP \fBfreedos\fR
Install FreeDOS boot files from the embedded resources.
.IP \fBmsdos\fR
Install MS-DOS boot files from the embedded resources.
.RE
If omitted the boot type is inferred: \fBimage\fR when \fB\-\-image\fR is
given, otherwise \fBnon-bootable\fR.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-cluster\-size " " \fIN\fR
Cluster (allocation unit) size in bytes for the formatted filesystem.
Must be a power of two in the range 512–2097152.  Defaults to 0, meaning
the filesystem formatter chooses the optimal cluster size for the volume.
.TP
.BR \-P ", " \-\-persistence " " \fIN\fR
Create a persistent data overlay partition of \fIN\fR MiB after the main
partition.  Only meaningful for live-USB images that support overlay
persistence (e.g.\& Ubuntu/Debian Casper images).  Set to \fB0\fR (default)
to skip the persistence partition.
.TP
.BR \-B ", " \-\-bad\-blocks
Scan the entire device for bad blocks before formatting.  Each block is
read (and optionally written) to detect sectors that cannot reliably store
data.  The number of scan passes is controlled by \fB\-\-nb\-passes\fR.
.TP
.BR \-N ", " \-\-nb\-passes " " \fIN\fR
Number of passes to use for the bad-blocks scan.  \fIN\fR must be between
1 and 4 inclusive.  Requires \fB\-\-bad\-blocks\fR.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-unattend\-xml " " \fIPATH\fR
Inject a pre-built Windows unattended-setup XML file into the formatted
drive.  \fIPATH\fR must point to a valid
.I autounattend.xml
(or equivalent) file.  Useful for scripting fully automated Windows
installations.
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-include\-hdds
Include hard drives (in addition to removable USB drives) in device
enumeration.  By default only removable drives appear in
.BR \-\-list\-devices
output and are accepted by
.BR \-\-device .
.TP
.BR \-z ", " \-\-zero\-drive
Wipe the entire device by writing zeros to every sector, then exit.  This
is equivalent to running
.B dd if=/dev/zero of=DEVICE
but uses Rufus's own I/O layer and progress reporting.  Does not perform
any filesystem formatting.
.TP
.BR \-F ", " \-\-force\-large\-fat32
Force FAT32 formatting on drives larger than 32\ GiB.  By default Rufus
refuses to format drives over this threshold as FAT32; this flag overrides
the restriction.  Useful for Nintendo Switch SD cards and similar use-cases.
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-ntfs\-compression
Enable file-level NTFS compression on the formatted volume.  Only has
effect when the target filesystem is NTFS.
.TP
.BR \-W ", " \-\-win\-to\-go
Write a Windows image as a bootable Windows To Go (WTG) installation.
Requires a Windows installation ISO that includes Windows To Go support
(\fBHAS_WINTOGO\fR: must be bootable, EFI-capable, and contain a
Windows installation image).  Use with \fB\-\-partition\-scheme gpt\fR and
\fB\-\-target uefi\fR for best results.  GPT+UEFI causes Rufus to create an
ESP and MSR partition before the main partition.
.TP
.BR \-w ", " \-\-write\-as\-image
Write the image file to the device as a raw byte-for-byte copy (equivalent
to \fBdd if=IMAGE of=DEVICE\fR).  No filesystem is created and no boot
records are installed beyond what the image itself contains.  Use this for
\fI.img\fR, \fI.vhd\fR, and \fI.vhdx\fR files, or for any image that
should be written verbatim without modification.
.TP
.BR \-Z ", " \-\-fast\-zeroing
When combined with \fB\-\-zero\-drive\fR, use the fast-zeroing algorithm:
write \fB0xFF\fR bytes, then read back each block and mark blocks that
return \fB0xFF\fR as good (skipping them on subsequent passes).  This is
faster than writing all zeros on devices that preserve unprogrammed values.
Without \fB\-\-zero\-drive\fR this flag has no effect.
.TP
.BR \-l ", " \-\-label " " \fILABEL\fR
Volume label to assign to the formatted filesystem.  Maximum length
depends on the filesystem: 11 characters for FAT/FAT32, 32 for NTFS, 30
for exFAT, 16 for ext2/3/4.
.TP
.B \-\-quick
Perform a quick format (write filesystem structures only; do not zero-fill
the data area).  This is the default.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-quick
Perform a full format (zero-fill the entire data area before writing
filesystem structures).  Significantly slower but useful when the device
may contain residual data that could confuse firmware.
.TP
.B \-\-verify
After writing an image file, verify the written data by re-reading the
device and comparing checksums.  Adds time proportional to the image size.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-prompt
Suppress all interactive confirmation dialogs and automatically accept
them.  Useful for scripting.  Use with care: this will proceed through all
warnings, including the "all data will be destroyed" prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print the Rufus version string (e.g.\& \fB4.13.0\fR) and exit with status 0.
.TP
.BR \-L ", " \-\-list\-devices
Enumerate all available removable drives and print them to standard output,
one drive per line in tab-separated format:
.IR device_path \t display_name \t size_bytes .
Exits with status 0 if any drives were found, 1 if none.
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
Output the
.BR \-\-list\-devices
results as a JSON array of objects instead of the default tab-separated
format.  Each object has the keys
.BR device ,
.BR name ,
and
.BR size .
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a brief usage summary and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Failure (device could not be opened, format operation failed, bad
arguments, etc.).  A human-readable error message is printed to
.IR stderr .
.SH EXAMPLES
Format \fI/dev/sdb\fR as FAT32 with MBR (quick format):
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo rufus --device /dev/sdb --fs fat32 --partition-scheme mbr
.EE
.RE
.PP
Write an ISO image to \fI/dev/sdb\fR:
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo rufus --device /dev/sdb --image ubuntu-24.04-desktop-amd64.iso
.EE
.RE
.PP
Write an image and verify the result, suppressing prompts:
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo rufus --device /dev/sdb \\
           --image archlinux-2024.01.01-x86_64.iso \\
           --verify --no-prompt
.EE
.RE
.PP
Create an ext4 volume with GPT on \fI/dev/sdb\fR:
.PP
.RS
.EX
sudo rufus --device /dev/sdb --fs ext4 --partition-scheme gpt \\
           --label "MYDATA" --no-quick
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/rufus/rufus.ini
Per-user settings file (XDG_CONFIG_HOME/rufus/rufus.ini).
.TP
.I /usr/share/rufus/res/
Data directory: locale files, boot resources (syslinux, uefi-ntfs, etc.).
.TP
.I /usr/share/polkit-1/actions/ie.akeo.rufus.policy
Polkit policy granting Rufus the right to re-launch with elevated
privileges without a full password prompt on desktop sessions.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUFUS_DATADIR
Override the data directory (default: \fI/usr/share/rufus\fR).  Useful
when running a local build: \fIRUFUS_DATADIR=./\fR.
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for user configuration.  Defaults to \fI~/.config\fR.
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Base directory for user data (cached DBX, Fido script, etc.).
Defaults to \fI~/.local/share\fR.
.TP
.B DISPLAY
.TQ
.B WAYLAND_DISPLAY
When either variable is set and Rufus was compiled with GTK support, the
graphical interface is presented unless \fB\-\-device\fR is given.
.SH NOTES
Rufus requires root privileges for all operations that open a block device
for writing.  On desktop systems with Polkit installed the application
re-launches itself transparently via
.BR pkexec (1)
when invoked as a normal user.  On headless systems run Rufus directly as
root or prefix with
.BR sudo (8).
.PP
The graphical and CLI modes share the same format engine.  CLI mode is
activated automatically when
.B \-\-device
is supplied as a command-line argument; the GTK initialisation path is
bypassed entirely.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at <https://github.com/PsychedelicPalimpsest/lin-rufus/issues>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR dd (1),
.BR mkfs.fat (8),
.BR mkntfs (8),
.BR mkfs.ext4 (8),
.BR mkfs.exfat (8),
.BR fdisk (8),
.BR gdisk (8),
.BR pkexec (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Pete Batard and Rufus contributors.
.PP
This man page was written for the Linux port of Rufus.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2011\-2025 Pete Batard.
.br
Copyright \(co 2026 PsychedelicPalimpsest.
.br
Copyright \(co 2025 Rufus contributors.
.PP
Rufus is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the
terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free Software
Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your option) any
later version.
